README.md, before:

# gohm

gohm is a tiny Go library with HTTP middleware functions.

## Usage

Documentation is available via
[![GoDoc](https://godoc.org/github.com/karrick/gohm?status.svg)](https://godoc.org/github.com/karrick/gohm).

## Description

`gohm` provides a small collection of HTTP middleware functions to be used when creating a Go micro
webservice.  With the exception of handler timeout control, all of the configuration options have
sensible defaults, so an empty `gohm.Config{}` object may be used to initialize the `http.Handler`
wrapper to start, and further customization is possible down the road.  Using the default handler
timeout elides timeout protection, so it's recommended that timeouts are always created for
production code.

Here is a simple example:

```Go
func main() {
    h := http.StripPrefix("/static/", http.FileServer(http.Dir("static")))

    // gzip response if client accepts gzip encoding
    h = gohm.WithGzip(h)

    // panic & timeout protection, error handling, and logging
    h = gohm.New(h, gohm.Config{Timeout: time.Second})

    http.Handle("/static/", h)
    log.Fatal(http.ListenAndServe(":8080", nil))
}
```

Here is an example with a few customizations:

```Go
const staticTimeout = time.Second // Used to control how long it takes to serve a static file.

var (
    // Will store statistics counters for status codes 1xx, 2xx, 3xx, 4xx, 5xx, as well as a
    // counter for all responses
    counters gohm.Counters

    // Used to dynamically control log level of HTTP logging.  After handler created, this must
    // be accessed using the sync/atomic package.
    logBitmask = gohm.LogStatusErrors

    // Determines HTTP log format
    logFormat = "{http-CLIENT-IP} {client-ip} [{end}] \"{method} {uri} {proto}\" {status} {bytes} {duration} {message}"
)

func main() {

    h := http.StripPrefix("/static/", http.FileServer(http.Dir("static")))

    h = gohm.WithGzip(h) // gzip response if client accepts gzip encoding

    // gohm was designed to wrap other http.Handler functions.
    h = gohm.New(h, gohm.Config{
        Counters:   &counters,   // pointer given so counters can be collected and optionally reset
        LogBitmask: &logBitmask, // pointer given so bitmask can be updated using sync/atomic
        LogFormat:  logFormat,
        LogWriter:  os.Stderr,
        Timeout:    staticTimeout,
    })

    http.Handle("/static/", h)
    log.Fatal(http.ListenAndServe(":8080", nil))
}
```

In the above example notice that each successive line wraps the handler of the line above it.  The
terms upstream and downstream do not refer to which line was above which other line in the source
code.  Rather, upstream handlers invoke downstream handlers.  In both of the above examples, the top
level handler is `gohm`, which is upstream of `gohm.WithGzip`, which in turn is upstream of
`http.StripPrefix`, which itself is upstream of `http.FileServer`, which finally is upstream of
`http.Dir`.

As another illustration, the following two example functions are equivalent, and both invoke
`handlerA` to perform some setup then invoke `handlerB`, which performs its setup work, and finally
invokes `handlerC`.  Both do the same thing, but source code looks vastly different.  In both cases,
`handlerA` is considered upstream from `handlerB`, which is considered upstream of `handlerC`.
Similarly, `handlerC` is downstream of `handlerB`, which is likewise downstream of `handlerA`.

```Go
func example1() {
    h := handlerA(handlerB(handlerC))
}

func example2() {
    h := handlerC
    h = handlerB(h)
    h = handlerA(h)
}
```

## Helper Functions

### Error

`Error` formats and emits the specified error message text and status code information to the
`http.ResponseWriter`, to be consumed by the client of the service.  This particular helper function
has nothing to do with emitting log messages on the server side, and only creates a response for the
client.  However, if a handler that invokes `gohm.Error` is wrapped with logging functionality by
`gohm.New`, then `gohm` will also emit a sensible log message based on the specified status code and
message text.  Typically handlers will call this method prior to invoking return to return to
whichever handler invoked it.

```Go
// example function which guards downstream handlers to ensure only HTTP GET method used to
// access resource.
func onlyGet(next http.Handler) http.Handler {
    return http.HandlerFunc(func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
        if r.Method != "GET" {
            gohm.Error(w, r.Method, http.StatusMethodNotAllowed)
            // 405 Method Not Allowed: POST
            return
        }
        next.ServeHTTP(w, r)
    })
}
```

## HTTP Handler Middleware Functions

### New

`New` returns a new `http.Handler` that calls the specified next `http.Handler`, and performs the
requested operations before and after the downstream handler as specified by the `gohm.Config`
structure passed to it.

It receives a `gohm.Config` instance rather than a pointer to one, to discourage modification after
creating the `http.Handler`.  With the exception of handler timeout control, all of the
configuration options have sensible defaults, so an empty `gohm.Config{}` object may be used to
initialize the `http.Handler` wrapper to start, and further customization is possible down the road.
Using the default handler timeout elides timeout protection, so it's recommended that timeouts are
always created for production code.  Documentation of the `gohm.Config` structure provides
additional details for the supported configuration fields.

#### Configuration Parameters

##### AllowPanics

`AllowPanics`, when set to true, causes panics to propagate from downstream handlers.  When set to
false, also the default value, panics will be converted into Internal Server Errors (status code
500).  You cannot change this setting after creating the `http.Handler`.

##### Counters

`Counters`, if not nil, tracks counts of handler response status codes.

##### LogBitmask

The `LogBitmask` parameter is used to specify which HTTP requests ought to be logged based on the
HTTP status code returned by the downstream `http.Handler`.

##### LogFormat

The following format directives are supported.  All times provided are converted to UTC before
formatting.

    begin-epoch:     time request received (epoch)
    begin-iso8601:   time request received (ISO-8601 time format)
    begin:           time request received (apache log time format)
    bytes:           response size
    client-ip:       client IP address
    client-port:     client port
    client:          client-ip:client-port
    duration:        duration of request from beginning to end, (seconds with millisecond precision)
    end-epoch:       time request completed (epoch)
    end-iso8601:     time request completed (ISO-8601 time format)
    end:             time request completed (apache log time format)
    error:           context timeout, context closed, or panic error message
    method:          request method, e.g., GET or POST
    proto:           request protocol, e.g., HTTP/1.1
    status:          response status code
    status-text:     response status text
    uri:             request URI

In addition, values from HTTP request headers can also be included in the log by prefixing the HTTP
header name with `http-`.  In the below example, each log line will begin with the value of the HTTP
request header `CLIENT-IP`:

```Go
format := "{http-CLIENT-IP} {http-USER} [{end}] \"{method} {uri} {proto}\" {status} {bytes} {duration}"
```

##### LogWriter

`LogWriter`, if not nil, specifies that log lines ought to be written to the specified `io.Writer`.
You cannot change the `io.Writer` to which logs are written after creating the `http.Handler`.

##### Timeout

`Timeout`, when not 0, specifies the amount of time allotted to wait for downstream `http.Handler`
response.  You cannot change the handler timeout after creating the `http.Handler`.  The zero value
for Timeout elides timeout protection, and `gohm` will wait forever for a downstream `http.Handler`
to return.  It is recommended that a sensible timeout always be chosen for all production servers.

### WithGzip

`WithGzip` returns a new `http.Handler` that optionally compresses the response text using the gzip
compression algorithm when the HTTP request's `Accept-Encoding` header includes the string `gzip`.

```Go
    mux := http.NewServeMux()
    mux.Handle("/example/path", gohm.WithGzip(someHandler))
```

Commit message:

logger emits hyphen when http request header not present

README.md, after:

# gohm

gohm is a tiny Go library with HTTP middleware functions.

## Usage

Documentation is available via
[![GoDoc](https://godoc.org/github.com/karrick/gohm?status.svg)](https://godoc.org/github.com/karrick/gohm).

## Description

`gohm` provides a small collection of HTTP middleware functions to be used when creating a Go micro
webservice.  With the exception of handler timeout control, all of the configuration options have
sensible defaults, so an empty `gohm.Config{}` object may be used to initialize the `http.Handler`
wrapper to start, and further customization is possible down the road.  Using the default handler
timeout elides timeout protection, so it's recommended that timeouts are always created for
production code.

Here is a simple example:

```Go
func main() {
    h := http.StripPrefix("/static/", http.FileServer(http.Dir("static")))

    // gzip response if client accepts gzip encoding
    h = gohm.WithGzip(h)

    // panic & timeout protection, error handling, and logging
    h = gohm.New(h, gohm.Config{Timeout: time.Second})

    http.Handle("/static/", h)
    log.Fatal(http.ListenAndServe(":8080", nil))
}
```

Here is an example with a few customizations:

```Go
const staticTimeout = time.Second // Used to control how long it takes to serve a static file.

var (
    // Will store statistics counters for status codes 1xx, 2xx, 3xx, 4xx, 5xx, as well as a
    // counter for all responses
    counters gohm.Counters

    // Used to dynamically control log level of HTTP logging.  After handler created, this must
    // be accessed using the sync/atomic package.
    logBitmask = gohm.LogStatusErrors

    // Determines HTTP log format
    logFormat = "{http-CLIENT-IP} {client-ip} [{end}] \"{method} {uri} {proto}\" {status} {bytes} {duration} {message}"
)

func main() {

    h := http.StripPrefix("/static/", http.FileServer(http.Dir("static")))

    h = gohm.WithGzip(h) // gzip response if client accepts gzip encoding

    // gohm was designed to wrap other http.Handler functions.
    h = gohm.New(h, gohm.Config{
        Counters:   &counters,   // pointer given so counters can be collected and optionally reset
        LogBitmask: &logBitmask, // pointer given so bitmask can be updated using sync/atomic
        LogFormat:  logFormat,
        LogWriter:  os.Stderr,
        Timeout:    staticTimeout,
    })

    http.Handle("/static/", h)
    log.Fatal(http.ListenAndServe(":8080", nil))
}
```

In the above example notice that each successive line wraps the handler of the line above it.  The
terms upstream and downstream do not refer to which line was above which other line in the source
code.  Rather, upstream handlers invoke downstream handlers.  In both of the above examples, the top
level handler is `gohm`, which is upstream of `gohm.WithGzip`, which in turn is upstream of
`http.StripPrefix`, which itself is upstream of `http.FileServer`, which finally is upstream of
`http.Dir`.

As another illustration, the following two example functions are equivalent, and both invoke
`handlerA` to perform some setup then invoke `handlerB`, which performs its setup work, and finally
invokes `handlerC`.  Both do the same thing, but source code looks vastly different.  In both cases,
`handlerA` is considered upstream from `handlerB`, which is considered upstream of `handlerC`.
Similarly, `handlerC` is downstream of `handlerB`, which is likewise downstream of `handlerA`.

```Go
func example1() {
    h := handlerA(handlerB(handlerC))
}

func example2() {
    h := handlerC
    h = handlerB(h)
    h = handlerA(h)
}
```

## Helper Functions

### Error

`Error` formats and emits the specified error message text and status code information to the
`http.ResponseWriter`, to be consumed by the client of the service.  This particular helper function
has nothing to do with emitting log messages on the server side, and only creates a response for the
client.  However, if a handler that invokes `gohm.Error` is wrapped with logging functionality by
`gohm.New`, then `gohm` will also emit a sensible log message based on the specified status code and
message text.  Typically handlers will call this method prior to invoking return to return to
whichever handler invoked it.

```Go
// example function which guards downstream handlers to ensure only HTTP GET method used to
// access resource.
func onlyGet(next http.Handler) http.Handler {
    return http.HandlerFunc(func(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
        if r.Method != "GET" {
            gohm.Error(w, r.Method, http.StatusMethodNotAllowed)
            // 405 Method Not Allowed: POST
            return
        }
        next.ServeHTTP(w, r)
    })
}
```

## HTTP Handler Middleware Functions

### New

`New` returns a new `http.Handler` that calls the specified next `http.Handler`, and performs the
requested operations before and after the downstream handler as specified by the `gohm.Config`
structure passed to it.

It receives a `gohm.Config` instance rather than a pointer to one, to discourage modification after
creating the `http.Handler`.  With the exception of handler timeout control, all of the
configuration options have sensible defaults, so an empty `gohm.Config{}` object may be used to
initialize the `http.Handler` wrapper to start, and further customization is possible down the road.
Using the default handler timeout elides timeout protection, so it's recommended that timeouts are
always created for production code.  Documentation of the `gohm.Config` structure provides
additional details for the supported configuration fields.

#### Configuration Parameters

##### AllowPanics

`AllowPanics`, when set to true, causes panics to propagate from downstream handlers.  When set to
false, also the default value, panics will be converted into Internal Server Errors (status code
500).  You cannot change this setting after creating the `http.Handler`.

##### Counters

`Counters`, if not nil, tracks counts of handler response status codes.

##### LogBitmask

The `LogBitmask` parameter is used to specify which HTTP requests ought to be logged based on the
HTTP status code returned by the downstream `http.Handler`.

##### LogFormat

The following format directives are supported.  All times provided are converted to UTC before
formatting.

    begin-epoch:     time request received (epoch)
    begin-iso8601:   time request received (ISO-8601 time format)
    begin:           time request received (apache log time format)
    bytes:           response size
    client-ip:       client IP address
    client-port:     client port
    client:          client-ip:client-port
    duration:        duration of request from beginning to end, (seconds with millisecond precision)
    end-epoch:       time request completed (epoch)
    end-iso8601:     time request completed (ISO-8601 time format)
    end:             time request completed (apache log time format)
    error:           context timeout, context closed, or panic error message
    method:          request method, e.g., GET or POST
    proto:           request protocol, e.g., HTTP/1.1
    status:          response status code
    status-text:     response status text
    uri:             request URI

In addition, values from HTTP request headers can also be included in the log by prefixing the HTTP
header name with `http-`.  In the below example, each log line will begin with the value of the HTTP
request header `CLIENT-IP`.  If the specified request header is not present, a hyphen will be used
in place of the non-existant value.

```Go
format := "{http-CLIENT-IP} {http-USER} [{end}] \"{method} {uri} {proto}\" {status} {bytes} {duration}"
```

##### LogWriter

`LogWriter`, if not nil, specifies that log lines ought to be written to the specified `io.Writer`.
You cannot change the `io.Writer` to which logs are written after creating the `http.Handler`.

##### Timeout

`Timeout`, when not 0, specifies the amount of time allotted to wait for downstream `http.Handler`
response.  You cannot change the handler timeout after creating the `http.Handler`.  The zero value
for Timeout elides timeout protection, and `gohm` will wait forever for a downstream `http.Handler`
to return.  It is recommended that a sensible timeout always be chosen for all production servers.

### WithGzip

`WithGzip` returns a new `http.Handler` that optionally compresses the response text using the gzip
compression algorithm when the HTTP request's `Accept-Encoding` header includes the string `gzip`.

```Go
    mux := http.NewServeMux()
    mux.Handle("/example/path", gohm.WithGzip(someHandler))
```
